Culture is often key to success, and the workforce is increasingly optimistic about AI opportunities When it comes to successful AI deployment and adoption, leadership and culture matter. A lot. Transformers were the most likely to report AI-ready cultural characteristics, such as:  High cross-organizational collaboration  Workforce optimism for the possibilities of AI  Actively nurturing and retaining AI professionals Respondents across all maturity segments reported that agility and willingness to change combined with executive leadership around a vision for how AI will be used are the most important factors in the development of an AI-ready culture (42% and 40% reported this as extremely important, respectively). This reinforces the importance of thoughtful change management as a foundational element of successful AI transformation; highoutcome organizations were more than 55% more likely to invest in change management compared to low-outcome organizations. Despite frequent underinvestment in change management, workforces are showing increasing optimism toward the possibilities AI could offer their careers: 82% of respondents surveyed indicate employees believe that working with AI technologies will enhance their performance and job satisfaction. However, there remain gaps in harnessing increased workforce optimism This growing workforce optimism may be the result of a shift in thinking in recent years. Many organizations have begun to realize the benefits of using AI to augment the workforce, rather than replace as many jobs as possible.1 In fact, a minority of surveyed organizations (30%) indicated a strong desire to automate as many jobs as possible. Many organizations are taking action to support a human-machine collaboration strategy: 43% of all respondents reported their organization has appointed a leader responsible for helping workers collaborate better with intelligent machines. Also, 44% of all respondents reported using AI to assist in decision-making at senior-most levels. Despite this, data also shows a significant gap in further actions needed to enable the hybrid human-machine workforce. Only 21% of all respondents reported actively educating workers on when to apply AI most effectively, 25% reported providing access of user-friendly AI systems to nontechnical / nonspecialized workers, 30% reported including workers in participative design of AI, and 36% reported redesigning organizational practices in light of a mixed human and machine workforce. Similarly, a minority of highoutcome organizations (32%) reported taking significant action needed to bring workers into greater collaboration with AI systems using innovation rewards or incentives for AI pilots. One of the biggest opportunities organizations may have for driving greater value with AI is redesigning work itsel Improving human and machine collaboration One of the biggest challenges to enabling stronger human and machine collaboration may be that leading practices around the talent models most likely to generate results are still emerging. That doesn’t mean all is unknown. An important element that has emerged in establishing positive working relationships with intelligent machines is to focus on fostering trust in algorithms by involving business specialists and frontline employees to help design them. For example, global retailer H&M has focused on bringing humans into the development process to both shift the culture and improve adoption of AI across the business. In an early AI pilot for the company, H&M involved merchandizers in testing and development of an end-of-season sale pricing algorithm.3 By involving merchandizers throughout development and testing, and doing quality tests comparing the algorithms and the human workforce results along the way, the company found that the combined human and machine workflow produced better results than either could achieve alone.4 And not only that, bringing the human workforce along that journey helped to shift the culture and attitudes around a transformational technology.