Technology and talent acquisition come together in the era of AI One of the major changes that AI presents to any organization is the need to plan technology and talent investments in tandem, looking at each as a source of critical skill sets—a unified human with machine workforce. Across all stages of maturity, assembling the technology and talent required to build, scale and innovate with enterprise AI is an evolving challenge. The shortage of skilled AI talent in particular has been well documented.7 Fortunately, over the last few years, many successful AI models and training sets have made their way into commercially available software and open-source offerings that can help jumpstart efforts and mitigate effects of the talent shortage. However, the ability for an organization to achieve differentiated tools and applications with AI still hinges in large part on the talent it is able to bring in-house. This appears to drive a pattern as organizations mature: For an organization early in its AI journey, it will likely need to hire externally to get a baseline of AI talent that can then: help train existing inhouse personnel, and help build more differentiated technology, as well as evaluate, partner with, and implement ecosystem solutions and alliances more successfully. Given that even the most advanced organizations are still early in their AI transformations, a majority of surveyed organizations reported they still prioritize bringing new AI talent into the business from outside, rather than retraining existing workers. Companies with fewer years of AI experience tend to rely more on external partners and, over time, shift to acquiring smaller companies with skilled workforces as they better define needs. Consistent with this, it appears a significant majority of the survey respondents acquire AI as a product or service (65%)—rather than attempting to build their own AI solutions in-house (35%)—leaning particularly on off-the-shelf solutions at the beginning of their journeys. Co-development also remains a common practice for AI solutions, with organizations teaming up with their vendors to create customized systems and processes. Since AI is still an emerging technology, many vendors continue to offer kit-like platforms rather than fully baked solutions. While early entrants may have found implementing off-the-shelf solutions was sufficient to differentiate themselves five years ago, the increasing maturity of the market is spurring some organizations to develop and train more customized in-house solutions that offer greater differentiation. Survey data bore this out: Organizations with more years of AI implementation experience tend to be more likely to try building their own AI solutions, while organizations with fewer years under their belt have a tendency to depend on packaged solutions. This convergence of technology and talent has opened up many questions about how these more-vertical capabilities and solutions sit within an organization. In the last two years of the survey data, it appears there is no consensus yet on which models drive stronger outcomes. But it is an important question for organizations to consider as they scale their AI implementations.