How you start your AI journey can determine where it ends Respondent organizations are implementing AI in a wide range of domain and industry processes, and they tend to adopt use cases in a specific order. Naturally, as companies increase their AI investments they eventually address a larger and wider range of use cases, but when it comes to selecting which business processes to start with, the choices they make could set the trajectory for how quickly and to what degree they will achieve successful outcomes and gain momentum through early efforts. Focusing on use cases that are too challenging, or have very long-term or small benefits can reduce a company’s enthusiasm to invest more, stifling further innovation and slowing down the transformational changes that AI can bring. On the other hand, starting with use cases that are easier to achieve, or have a proportionally faster or higher return on investment, can create momentum for further investment and make it easier to drive internal cultural and organizational changes that can accelerate the benefits of AI. Furthermore, the processes, practices and regulatory contexts specific to each industry have a large influence on the way that companies in different industries pursue AI investments, and the degree to which the insights from AI are integrated into decisionmaking. For example, those surveyed claim top use cases of AI across industries include cloud pricing optimization (44%), voice assistants, chatbots and conversational AI (41%), predictive maintenance (41%) and uptime / reliability optimization (41%). But top use cases could vary by industry. For example, 48% of technology, media and telecommunications, 47% of life sciences and health care, and 46% energy, resources and industrials use AI for cloud pricing optimization; whereas 43% of government and public services industry uses AI for predictive maintenance; and 42% of financial services industry uses AI for voice assistants, chatbots and conversational AI. In the following section, an introduction to each industry’s most common use cases is explored. In select industries, a higher focus on AI applications that are relevant only to their industry are found, while others may focus more heavily on domain applications that can, for example, accelerate marketing or drive more efficiency across the supply chain. Consumer The consumer industry includes a vast array of business types, ranging from consumer products to hotels, restaurants and airlines. While they function very differently across the value drivers, all sectors are united by their focus on serving customers. Within each sector use case adoption may shift significantly. In consumer products and manufacturing firms there appears to be a divide between smaller firms that struggle most with staff shortages and hiring skilled operators, and larger firms that struggle most with costs of inputs and managing costs across larger and more complex production processes. The former group tends to see the most success with bringing AI assistants to the shop floor in the form of virtual operator assistants, while larger firms tend to see better results from investing in AI-enabled value chain optimization to identify hidden opportunities and overlooked savings. Transportation companies that focus on optimization problems such as spare parts management or fleet management (essentially cost savings) tend to underperform companies driving further investment in autonomous vehicles, the adoption of which drives larger organizational and operational changes. In the retail sector, we observe that companies that focus on AI investments to drive top-line growth, such as AI-enabled promotion management to drive more sales, can find that they obtain lower-value transactions or potentially drive customers to expect discounts and deals. Higher-performing companies tend to start with investments in differential pricing. Consumer case study A multibillion-dollar global food ingredients company needed to make better-informed pricing decisions. Account managers were making quotes solely on gut feeling and personal experience, without support from competitive information or analytic insights to improve their customer negotiations. The company implemented an analytics pricing solution to generate price targets at the customer and product levels and deliver quantitative insights that account managers used to communicate the value of their products and services to customers. The solution also enabled what-if scenario planning to improve negotiations and profits. The company’s new pricing and promotions framework generated a 2% increase in annual revenues. Life sciences and health care (LSHC) Two years after the world was introduced to COVID-19, the recognition of AI’s importance to life sciences and health care companies has become increasingly clear. There is a stronger urgency, especially among biopharmaceutical executives, to tackle the risks associated with the technology in order to innovate and gain an edge over the competition. Data from the survey indicates that top use cases across life sciences and health care as an industry still tend to focus primarily on automating repetitive tasks and standard cross-industry business processes. This is seen across many industries, where the frequency of back-office functions rising to the top 10 is high. However, a deeper look at the individual subsectors reveals some interesting differences among the top use cases. Within life sciences, the presence of more advanced and industry-specific use cases, such as smarter drug manufacturing, shows no signs of slowing down. AI’s role within the biopharmaceutical R&D value chain manifests in the preeminent role of smart drug discovery applications. For its part, the leading industry-specific health care AI use cases focus on outcomes and monitoring in such potentially transformational areas as AI-assisted diagnoses including predictive diagnoses, patient engagement, insurance fraud detection and smarter hospitals. Recent years have also witnessed the burgeoning role of trustworthy AI in ensuring more equitable health care delivery outcomes. Key in this regard is in guarding against the kind of model bias that could result in unfair and inequitable health care delivery and insurance coverage, among other areas. Another recent development points to the potentially accelerating effect of the global pandemic on AI adoption within the health care sector. The pandemic highlighted how AI can help hospitals and other providers respond to a health care emergency. As a result of the pandemic, a number of leading medical schools and hospitals have recently established AI-focused departments to advance how AI can better predict and optimize the delivery of health care services under such extreme global conditions in the future. Interestingly, in looking at both sectors, industry respondents who still find themselves in the Starters category also reported a meaningfully increased focus on use cases that are higher value, but significantly more difficult (such as research and development and computer-assisted diagnostics), relative to more AI-mature players. This could be slowing down progress, as they may not be reaping the rewards or faster returns from use cases that may be more low-hanging fruit. That more AI-advanced organizations rely on the technology for more industry-agnostic tactical cases, relatively speaking, suggests that the real payoff to AI adoption is currently in cross-industry use cases. It also may speak to some of the hurdles that industry-specific AI use case adoption faces within LSHC. This also speaks to how critical the decision-making process can be early in the AI maturity journey. It’s important to develop an AI strategy that can achieve outcomes in a shorter time frame, while also identifying use cases that may require a steeper learning curve and a more significant time-to-value realization. Life sciences and health care case study COVID-19 magnified the demand for health care services, as consumers have become more sensitive to how they interact with providers. Success in the health care industry increasingly means simple, seamless customer access, and a major US health care organization found itself trying to meet patient needs and deliver a superior experience to its customers. Its first challenge: to personalize interactions, efficiently coordinate care, and get patients to adhere to medications correctly. There were too many touch points that consumers needed to follow to get the care they needed, and oftentimes they were difficult to coordinate. Meanwhile, the company also needed to expand its data science and cloud data engineering capabilities to address these needs rapidly, especially as the COVID-19 pandemic increased demand for its services. The first step to solving these challenges was to assess the current consumer and patient journey processes, data and technologies in order to understand existing gaps. Based on that information, the client was able to design and implement an end-to-end AI-enabled personalization solution using: • Clustering techniques to identify and categorize consumers who may not have been part of the process • Reinforcement learning to identify the proper outreach to connect with each consumer individually • Omnichannel platforms that create inherent efficiencies by automatically routing messages to the consumer’s choice of outreach (text, phone, email and more) By implementing a new suite of AI use cases, the client now operates with enhanced personalized customer experience, improved medication adherence and a reduced cost of care. Scalable, AI-enabled personalization supports customer service, care coordination and campaign management across the organization. AI became the engine to drive innovation throughout. Using data and insights derived from machine learning models allowed the understanding of each consumer’s health care needs and the automatic determination of how, when and which content to deliver through multiple communication channels. The engagement touched about 10% of its customers, resulting in more than $100 million in revenue. Energy, resources and industrials (ER&I) Energy, resources and industrials as an industry embodies a range of asset-intensive sectors, spanning from oil, gas and chemicals to utilities to industrials, heavily focused on discrete and process manufacturing. These companies have invested substantial amounts of time, money and resources over the past two decades into getting instrumentation and technologies in place and interconnected in order to accumulate operationally relevant data. This is evident by the survey results reflecting focus in IT cloud pricing and optimization of uptime and reliability for managing data, as well as the expansion of human resources with skills in data engineering. The sheer amount of structured and unstructured data (i.e., video / surveillance, machine control systems) streaming into disparate data platforms continues to grow exponentially—leaving ER&I companies to face new challenges in obtaining and delivering human-accessible insight from their vast amounts of accumulated disparate data to make better, more informed decisions. Our survey shows that while the digital and data foundation for ER&I is ripe for AI, the operational models for harnessing AI technology have not yet made inroads into ER&I compared with respondents in other industries. Current applications by respondents of AI appear most prevalent in the back-office functions through automation and analysis, while disparate operational technology data sets remain in functional silos. Challenges to broader enterprise adoption with the core operations can be attributed to several factors, including continued challenges with data quality and centralization as well as the historical reliance on engineering principles for operational decision-making. This, by extension, highlights the relative abundance within the industry of those who value firstprinciple mathematics over the less discernible insights brought by advanced analytics, machine learning or artificial intelligence. Other reasons cited by respondents for slow adoption within the industry include the cyclical focus on cost as opposed to long-term value creation, lack of organizational change management capabilities for introducing innovative AI technology, and under-developed corporate governance to account for and track the value realized from AI initiatives. Trust in AI for critical decision-making is expected to continue to mature in ER&I as organizational capabilities mature. The high degree of emphasis on safety and reliability across ER&I necessitates that validation and caution be applied to all new technologies, especially those which alter human interactions with equipment and field assets. As organizations mature their capabilities in AI people, process and technology, trust should be continually improved with a focus on traceability and explainability of AI systems. With the stringent regulations and geopolitical factors affecting the ER&I industry, it is important to consider reshaping and rethinking the evolving AI adoption strategies for most companies in this industry. The “value realization phase” entails using data with a focus on helping accelerate resource extraction, reduce nonproductive time or downtime, improve levels of safety, enhance revenue streams with distributed energy resources and renewable sources, and optimize fleet management and routings; and, helping to improve the automation of collecting environmental, sustainability and governance metrics. Toward that end, enhanced AI expertise within the industry will be important to the advancement of its use, especially in many of the high-potential use cases native to the ER&I industry. Advancement in technology from cloud infrastructure to edge computing and from IoT sensors to cybersecurity mechanisms has made the cost of availability of data cheaper and secured. By application of advanced analytics and artificial intelligence, ER&I companies can identify trends and predict events throughout processes to quickly respond to disruptions and improve efficiencies. The shift to a more digital future further helps this industry surpass human limitations, to enable the type of decision-making that helps the end-to-end value chain operate efficiently and effectively, and be continuously focused on innovation. Industry executives seem to recognize the significant potential for the use of AI at the front lines of their asset operations. Accordingly, the survey data shows good growth in the areas of predictive maintenance, safety and process optimization, which shows the trends toward the type of prescriptive insight that other industries have used to solidify the importance of AI. This is likely a harbinger of things to come as ER&I organizations tackle some of their most challenging historical problems and leapfrog toward new thinking and aspirations. Energy, resources and industrials case study A large industrial products manufacturer was keen to reduce spend on warranty costs and pricing claimswith claim audits a dauntingly manual process. But more important, the company knew that buried within those claims could be potentially critical insights around quality and safety. A smart AI technology solution could provide a more comprehensive review and analysis that could better screen claims and improve end-to-end management of supplier chargeback and product quality. How could it implement the robust analytics models needed to make it possible to review and analyze the data in a way that would yield the benefits the manufacturer sought? To most effectively dig through this mountain of data to uncover the insights the client knew were buried within, the company leveraged an AI-driven solution that performs millions of analyses and monitors warranty and pricing claims on an ongoing basis to detect quality issues or potential waste due to anomalies, policy violations or other irregularities. As the technology identifies opportunities, it turns those insights into alerts and action plans, enabling humans to investigate and research high-risk dealers. From a user viewpoint, the technology is streamlined: It automatically ingests new data, leverages AI and specialized analytic models, and displays insights and visuals that support workflow and management tracking. And not only was the technology itself automated, but so too was its deployment, which was implemented within the organization’s environment through a fully automated production process. Since launch, the solution has delivered a real impact on the client’s business, helping to improve issue detection, process efficiency and coverage; and helping to identify potential recovery opportunities. The company now detects issues more quickly, significantly saving on warranty costs and pricing claims, and can make informed decisions for the future. And the journey is hardly over. Additional features enable the client to further refine existing analytics and detect monitored issues more accurately, as well as extend the purview of the analyses in order to capture more areas of recovery and loss prevention. The discoveries the client has made around intelligent quality, warranty waste and pricing claims have also helped drive behavior change at the dealer and distributor levels, further reducing warranty spend. The solution has positively impacted how they work and has improved their efficiency. Technology, media and telecommunications (TMT) Technology, media and telecommunications companies seem to recognize the criticality of AI far more than any other industry—72% of respondents strongly agree that AI is very important to their ability to stay competitive over the next five years, 12 percentage points higher than any other industry. That may come as little surprise, as the first brands that come to mind in the industry are often digital natives such as Google, Amazon13 and Facebook14—brands that are often considered synonymous with AI sophistication, with AI used extensively in their commercial products and services (many of which are foundational enablers across all industries). However, that’s not the whole story of the industry. Some of the legacy brands within the TMT space, such as AT&T15 and Hearst,16 are also among the most significant. Survey data indicates that telecommunications and media companies tend to be the furthest along at embracing AI, the sector with the largest proportion of Transformers (and, incidentally, also the largest number of Underachievers). This maturity is likely attributed to telecommunications’ longstanding focus on operational efficiency and, for media companies, the rapid uptake of digital marketing techniques. Customer acquisition and retention efforts have also driven the development of AI capabilities for telecommunications and media companies and are reflected in the prevalence of these use cases across all sectors. Generally, the most common AI use cases for TMT companies still focus on cross-industry business processes. Again, according to our survey, telecommunications, media and entertainment (TME) stands out slightly in its AI adoption with use cases such as video content analysis, audio and video mining, and production operations automation. External factors like a push to cloud and an increase in streaming are enablers that are encouraging this adoption. These are also growth factors in continuing to monetize such digital-first properties. TME companies still derive the most value from use cases related to back-end operations that tend to enable standard business practices. An interesting distinction between the subsectors in this group is that TME companies seem to be better than technology companies at generating value from customer data (e.g., customer feedback analytics). This may not be not surprising, given the wealth of data that TME companies tend to have about their customers compared to technology firms. Technology, media and telecommunications case study The cloud services group at a major global technology company was stuck in sourcing customer leads the old-fashioned way. And for many years this resulted in tremendous growth. But that company growth wasn’t evenly distributed—consumer products were driving most of it. Enterprise cloud services were not. Selling those meant establishing relationships, which is much harder to scale. This meant the company would need to focus its strength in data science where it could have the most impact: improving enterprise cloud sales leads. To do this, some of the latest artificial intelligence techniques came to the fore, primarily by tapping the company’s data to build a variety of machine learning models and increasing the number of considerations for qualifying a sales lead from two ... to as many as possible. The task then became to choose and fine-tune the most effective model, then put machines to work learning patterns in the customer data. Was there a sweet spot, in terms of a buyer’s title? How often had they been contacted? Time of day? The patterns uncovered by the machines helped the marketing team better qualify and prioritize leads. They also helped the sales team get specific on the needs they’d be addressing with each lead, as well as the speed and frequency of contact. If fed new data, the model could also be used to predict likely outcomes. What if the cloud services team changed how a lead is initially greeted? Or explain a different product benefit? With digital heavy lifting like this happening in the background, sales reps can now focus on what they do best (and what no machine can do): make human connections. This kind of operational efficiency has led to real results. Within six months, the company’s cloud services group enjoyed an increase in its sales pipeline overall, with lead-to-opportunity conversions up 20%. Sales of cloud services increased in that same period, with no increased costs for the sales team. Marketers are contributing to growth of the sales pipeline more than previously, while the sales team is closing more deals. Financial services (FS) The financial services industry is experiencing significant disruption as companies navigate increasing customer expectations, shifting regulations, and rising competition from fintechs and neobanks. Compared to other industries surveyed, financial services companies tend to be lagging slightly in their AI maturity journey. Survey respondents came in below average in their responses to how important AI is to their organization’s ability to compete in the next five years. While all organizations continue to invest in intelligent automation to reduce costs, steady progress is being made across all surveyed businesses (the most advanced being fintechs) toward differentiating themselves at scale while navigating the complex business, data, technology and regulatory landscape. Next-generation digital customer experience and broad risk management are likely to be particularly lucrative opportunities to drive positive impact and profitable growth for the industry. In addition, natural language generation / processing and voice agents were seen as technologies that businesses particularly value in the coming years. Financial services case study Like many of its peers, a US regional bank’s retail marketing team relied on mass marketing certain geographic areas with direct physical mail offers. These campaigns yielded poor ROI due to low sign-up rates and a lack of personalization in campaign product offers. This approach failed to use customer-specific data to decide which customers receive offers, and the limited geographic reach missed other potentially highpropensity customers. The client’s marketing team wanted to enrich its existing customer data to improve the campaign sign-up rates, which could lead to lower campaign costs and higher ROI. The client’s existing customer data provided an adequate picture of the customer interactions with the bank, but it failed to capture data elements that would indicate which customers were likely to sign up when receiving the campaign mailer. By building a campaign engine using thirdparty data that captured customer behaviors and attitudes, the team became able to target fewer customers with direct-mail offers while maintaining its total acquisition numbers. Alternatively, the team now has the opportunity to better target more customers at higher conversion rates. The team was able to use all third-party data to accelerate the development of an AI-based propensity model to identify and better target new customers and improve conversion rates. The model was able to leverage data from multiple aspects of a customer’s life such as spending behaviors at local retailers, property values and levels of physical activity. Furthermore, the final model only used a small subset of the 1,000 customizable features that can be adapted in the future to improve campaign performance for different products and geographies. The bank now has a tool that has quickly improved its ability to target and personalize offers to customers. The effort has improved campaign effectiveness, while reducing costs, and increased organic customer growth. This, combined with additional insights into customer channel preferences, has set the stage for reimagining its in-house marketing capabilities and driving ongoing next-generation marketing transformations for continued profitable growth into the future. Government and public services (GPS) AI holds enormous potential to help government and public service agencies improve operations and help meet the needs of citizens in new ways. Agencies within the government and public service industry vary widely in their missionsand also in their adoption of AI, both in terms of maturity and of the use cases they pursue. Across all types of organizations we surveyedranging from defense to health and higher education—the majority are still focusing AI efforts on back-office activities where efficiencies can be created through automation. However, in addition to efficiency-focused efforts, some more-specific value-driving use cases are beginning to emerge within various sectors of government and higher education. Higher education institutions appear to be increasingly using AI to refine their marketing efforts, while also exploring how AI may affect and evolve teaming in the future to help students thrive in the future workplace. Health agencies are focusing AI capabilities on disease outbreak predictions. Defense organizations, which tend to be more advanced in their experimentation and capability development, are driving innovations that may spread to the private sector. For example, the Air Force Research Lab has been learning via sensors and wearables how best to have pilots collaborate with new intelligent tools. Data is being used to develop algorithms that predict causes of workload stress or human error when working with smart machines, helping to predict performance and safety issues before they occur.20 Lab teams also are exploring how technology can predict and assist humans before performance degrades, and what are the primary factors that most influence humanmachine performance. For some agencies there may be increased hesitancy in deploying AI, due to the high standard government agencies tend to be held to. Often more than a private company might deal with, they need to account for privacy, security and legal standards; compatibility with legacy systems; and evolving workloads. Government and public services case study In the spring of 2020, COVID-19 infection rates were rising rapidly, and hospitals were struggling to find enough beds for patients. Amid this escalating crisis, one state wanted to prioritize opening test sites and distributing personal protective equipment (PPE) to the vulnerable populations who needed it most—but it struggled to identify who they were. Getting tests and PPE to the most vulnerable was critical in the early stages of the crisis when the state was facing limited supplies and low public trust. With limited resources, door-to-door PPE distribution and education had to take place in areas where health precautions would make the greatest impact. Selecting and launching test sites had similar challenges. Location considerations such as accessibility through public transportation, distance of travel and methods of transportation were critical. The state’s equity-driven approach required sophisticated data mapping that calculated income disparities, disease rates and other criteria to produce a clear snapshot of locations that presented the least number of hurdles to get people through the door. To provide the insight the state needed to make these decisions, a predictive population health analytics platform was designed to identify populations most at risk of certain health conditions. It leveraged one of the largest known social determinants of health (SDOH) databases in the United States, including all 50 states, more than 1,500 variables at the household level, and health risk models for more than 20 disease types. Data scientists created predictive models and analyses that pinpointed areas with at-risk populations for state leaders. The data also helped inform where languages other than English were spoken in certain areas—information necessary to translate and distribute education materials. Using advanced geospatial analytics, the platform also recommended testing locations where the driving distance for residents most affected by COVID-19 was 10 minutes or less. Results came fast. State officials received insights in a few hours instead of weeks, expediting data-driven decision-making. The faster decisions could be made, the greater the number of vaccinations that could be distributed to vulnerable populations and help slow the spread of the virus. The new data-driven “equity lens” helped the state formalize a long-term emergency management plan designed to close the gap to public health access. A first-of-its-kind public dashboard was developed to highlight the state’s efforts to equitably distribute resources and services, and inspire state and local leaders to advance equity across key social factors such as housing, income, education, broadband access and unemployment.